# Why Learn Data Structures and Algorithms?



Link: https://www.programiz.com/dsa/why-algorithms



This article is for those who have just started learning algorithms and wondered how impactful it will be to boost their career/programming skills. It is also for those who wonder why big companies like Google, Facebook, and Amazon hire programmers who are exceptionally good at optimizing Algorithms.





## What are Algorithms?

Informally, an algorithm is nothing but a mention of steps to solve a problem. They are essentially a solution.

For example, an algorithm to solve the problem of factorials might look something like this:

Problem: Find the factorial of `n`:

```
Initialize fact = 1
For every value v in range 1 to n:
    Multiply the fact by v
fact contains the factorial of n
```

Here, the algorithm is written in English. If it was written in a programming language, we would call it to code instead. Here is a code for finding the factorial of a number in C++:

```c++
int factorial(int n) {
    int fact = 1;
    for (int v = 1; v <= n; v++) {
        fact = fact * v;
    }
    return fact;
}
```

Programming is all about data structures and algorithms. Data structures are used to hold data while algorithms are used to solve the problem using that data.

Data structures and algorithms (DSA) goes through solutions to standard problems in detail and gives you an insight into how efficient it is to use each one of them. It also teaches you the science of evaluating the efficiency of an algorithm. This enables you to choose the best of various choices.





## Use of Data Structures and Algorithms to Make Your Code Scalable

Time is precious.

Suppose, Alice and Bob are trying to solve a simple problem of finding the sum of the first 1011 natural numbers. While Bob was writing the algorithm, Alice implemented it proving that it is as simple as criticizing Donald Trump.

Algorithm (by Bob):

```
Initialize sum = 0
for every natural number n in range 1 to 1011 (inclusive):
    add n to sum
sum is your answer
```

Code (by Alice):

```c
int findSum() {
    int sum = 0;
    for (int v = 1; v <= 100000000000; v++) {
        sum += v;
    }
    return sum;
}
```

Alice and Bob are feeling euphoric of themselves that they could build something of their own in almost no time. Let's sneak into their workspace and listen to their conversation.

```
Alice: Let's run this code and find out the sum.
Bob: I ran this code a few minutes back but it's still not showing the output. What's wrong with it?
```

Oops, something went wrong! A computer is the most deterministic machine. Going back and trying to run it again won't help. So let's analyze what's wrong with this simple code.

Two of the most valuable resources for a computer program are time and memory.

The time taken by the computer to run code is: 

```
Time to run code = number of instructions * time to execute each instruction
```

The number of instructions depends on the code you used, and the time taken to execute each code depends on your machine and compiler.

In this case, the total number of instructions executed (let's say `x`) are <code>x = 1 + (10<sup>11</sup> + 1) + (10<sup>11</sup>) + 1</code>, which is <code>x = 2 * 10<sup>11</sup> + 3</code>.

Let us assume that a computer can execute <code>y = 10<sup>8</sup></code> instructions in one second (it can vary subject to machine configuration). The time taken to run above code is:

```
Time taken to run code = x/y (greater than 16 minutes)
```

Is it possible to optimize the algorithm so that Alice and Bob do not have to wait for 16 minutes every time they run this code?

I am sure that you already guessed the right method. The sum of first `N` natural numbers is given by the formula: `Sum = N * (N + 1) / 2`.

Converting it into code will look something like this:

```c
int sum(int N) { return N * (N + 1) / 2; }
```

This code executes in just one instruction and gets the task done no matter what the value is. Let it be greater than the total number of atoms in the universe. It will find the result in no time.

The time taken to solve the problem, in this case, is `1/y` (which is 10 nanoseconds). By the way, the fusion reaction of a hydrogen bomb takes 40-50 ns, which means your program will complete successfully even if someone throws a hydrogen bomb on your computer at the same time you ran your code.

>   Note: Computers take a few instructions (not 1) to compute multiplication and division. I have said 1 just for the sake of simplicity.